---
layout: page
---

I am Laurent Christophe, a consultant at the Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB). I am an enthusiastic programmer and a prolific contributor to open-source projects.

After graduating in Civil Engineering from the Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB) in 2012 with great distinction, I spent eight years conducting research at the Software Languages Lab (SOFT) of the Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), focusing on dynamic code analysis. I have a strong publication record, with papers presented at prestigious international conferences such as ICSME, SANER, and GIPCE. With over 60 published npm packages and more than 650,000 total downloads, I have a proven track record of building open-source prototypes that are widely adopted and extended by others. My flagship project, [Aran](https://github.com/lachrist/aran)---a full-fledged JavaScript code instrumenter---has supported both internal and international collaborations and contributed to multiple publications.

Since 2020, I have worked as a consultant for the Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), leading multiple software R\&D projects. For most of this time, I contributed to [AppMap](https://appmap.io), a U.S.-based startup focused on runtime code analysis. There, I led the development of a JavaScript client designed to collect large volumes of execution data while integrating seamlessly into diverse deployment scenarios, including automated testing with Jest and Mocha. I also contributed to several web- and mobile-based projects, including the development of the prototype for [EasyWanit](https://www.wanit.com/easywanit), a mobile application tasked with communicating via a custom Bluetooth protocol to a boiler. Over five years of industry consulting, I have developed strong software engineering skills, including agile methodologies, Git-based workflows, release pipelines, and continuous integration practices.

Through the production systems and prototypes I have developed over the years, I have established a proven track record as an excellent programmer with expert-level knowledge of JavaScript and TypeScript. I am highly proficient in standard web and mobile technologies and have mastered related languages such as SQL, Python, Java, Kotlin, and Ruby. Additionally, I have significant experience with Haskell, having taught it for seven years at the university and successfully applied it in several projects.
